lint config, add ruby to syntax highlighting, add rails blog post wip (#44)
enterprise-oss/osso-docs: blog/2021-01-27-adding-saml-sso-to-rails.mdx

---
slug: saml-sso-rails
title: Add SAML SSO to a Rails 6 app
author: Sam Bauch
author_title: Co-founder
author_url: https://github.com/sbauch
author_image_url: https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/923033?s=460&u=db9bb41f9b279750c74afc1be0ab51db05539593&v=4
tags: [Osso, SAML, SSO, Rails, Ruby]
description: Learn 3 approaches to add SAML SSO to a Rails 6 application.
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';
import Link from '@docusaurus/Link';

### SAML Background

> SAML SSO refers to an authentication mechanism preferred by enterprise companies. The SSO part stands for Single Sign-On. From the enterprise’s perspective, they desire a centralized service where there employees can authenticate, which then provides authenticated access to the applications they use for work. These services are called Identity Providers (IDPs), and they are the *Single* place where enterprise employees *Sign-On.* This is an alternative to employees using password based authentication at the various applications they use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SAML SSO refers to an authentication mechanism preferred by enterprise companies. The SSO part stands for Single Sign-On. From the enterprise’s perspective, they desire a centralized service where their employees can authenticate, which then provides authenticated access to the applications they use for work. These services are called Identity Providers (IDPs), and they are the *Single* place where enterprise employees *Sign-On.* This is an alternative to employees using password-based authentication for each of the various applications they use.
```

> <!-- truncate -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> The SAML part stands for Secure Assertion Markup Language. SAML utilizes a domain specific flavor of XML that describes an authenticated user, encoded to a string and passed to your application in a query parameter. Your application decodes the `SAMLResponse` using a key that the enterprise provides to you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SAML part stands for Secure Assertion Markup Language. SAML utilizes a domain-specific flavor of XML that describes an authenticated user, encoded to a string and passed to your application in a query parameter. Your application decodes the `SAMLResponse` using a key that the enterprise provides to you.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- truncate -->
```

> The details of the SAML Response are less important than understanding the general flow. When a user wants to sign in using SAML, you must send that user to their Identity Provider with a `SAMLRequest` that identifies your application. The user signs in to their IDP, and is redirected back to you with the `SAMLResponse`. What makes this a tiny bit complicated for a multi-tenant application is routing the user to the correct IDP. SAML SSO breaks the common understanding of a login flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The details of the SAML Response are less important than understanding the general flow. When a user wants to sign in using SAML, you must send that user to their Identity Provider with a `SAMLRequest` that identifies your application. The user signs in to their IDP, and is redirected back to you with the `SAMLResponse`. What makes this a tiny bit complicated for a multi-tenant application is routing the user to the correct IDP, as SAML SSO breaks our common understanding of a login flow.
```

### Let’s Build and Iterate

Once you wrap your head around understanding the SAML flow, it’s really not challenging to implement SAML in a Rails app - IDPs themselves offer great open source libraries to help with your integration. You can definitely get very far in a day or two. But like most things in engineering, the last 10% can take 90% of the effort, and while we all love to say “I could build that in a weekend,” we often later eat our words when we realize all of the edge cases, documentation needs, scaling challenges and unknown unknowns that make this or any other project worth doing a bit more involved than a quick weekend hack.

> I’m a co-founder an open source company Osso - our microservice is a Ruby and React app that allows you to onboard SAML SSO customers, generates custom documentation for each customer to perform their onboarding tasks in their IDP, and allows your Rails app to consume Osso using OAuth - we even provide `omniauth-osso` to make consuming an Osso instance from your Rails app incredibly simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I’m a co-founder of an open source company Osso - our microservice is a Ruby and React app that allows you to onboard SAML SSO customers, generates custom documentation for each customer to perform their onboarding tasks in their IDP, and allows your Rails app to consume Osso using OAuth - we even provide `omniauth-osso` to make consuming an Osso instance from your Rails app incredibly simple.
```

> Osso also offers paid plans, and you can skip right to our <Link to={useBaseUrl('/pricing')}>pricing page</Link> to learn more about hosted Osso if you need SAML yesterday. Or you can jump right in to <Link to={useBaseUrl('/docs/deploy/overview')}>deploying an open source Osso instance</Link> from our GitHub repo. There’s certainly the possibility of using `osso-rb` in your Rails app directly - you’ll want to mount our 3 rack based apps, pull in migrations, etc. - this post however will focus on a microservices approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Osso also offers paid plans, and you can skip right to our <Link to={useBaseUrl('/pricing')}>pricing page</Link> to learn more about hosted Osso if you need SAML yesterday. Or you can jump right in to <Link to={useBaseUrl('/docs/deploy/overview')}>deploying an open source Osso instance</Link> from our GitHub repo. There’s certainly the possibility of using `osso-rb` in your Rails app directly — you’ll want to mount our 3 rack based apps, pull in migrations, etc. — but this post will focus instead on a microservices approach.
```

> So if you’d like to begin from first principles, follow along here as we build up a production ready SAML SSO integration, starting with a single tenant approach, then layering in multi-tenancy. Once we have multi-tenant support, we’ll address questions about scalability and serviceability - how can we repeatedly add additional tenants, without spending significant engineering or customer support cycles? I will encourage you to use Osso, and will show you exactly how, but will highlight the things you need to be considering in order to roll out a production ready SAML integration without Osso.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**So**, if you’d like to begin from first principles, follow along here as we build up a production-ready SAML SSO integration, starting with a single tenant approach, then layering in multi-tenancy. Once we have multi-tenant support, we’ll address questions about scalability and serviceability — how can we repeatedly add additional tenants, without spending significant engineering or customer support cycles? I _will_ encourage you to use Osso, and show you exactly how, but will also highlight the things you need to be considering in order to roll out a production ready SAML integration _without_ Osso.
```

> We’ll use a single Rails app repository throughout this tutorial. The [main branch](https://github.com/enterprise-oss/saml-rails) is a  barebones Rails 6 app with Devise and a User model, and for each of our steps below we’ll move to a feature branch so we can see a full diff. Each step adds more functionality, getting you closer to a production-ready, multi-tenant integration. Each step also uses open source software, where the library used in the previous step is a dependency of the next step’s library. Neat!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ll use a single Rails app repository throughout this tutorial. The [main branch](https://github.com/enterprise-oss/saml-rails) is a barebones Rails 6 app with Devise and a User model, and for each of our steps below we’ll move to a feature branch so we can see a full diff. Each step adds more functionality, getting you closer to a production-ready, multi-tenant integration. Each step also uses open source software, where the library used in the previous step is a dependency of the next step’s library. Neat!
```

We’ll also make use of Osso’s [mock IDP](https://github.com/enterprise-oss/sinatra-ruby-idp) and [demo instance](https://demo.ossoapp.com), especially when we get into multi-tenancy. You’ll still want to register with an IDP for a developer account in order to have access to an IDP for a second tenant - we recommend an [Okta developer account](https://developer.okta.com/signup/).

### Base Rails application

> We’ll use the same Rails 6 application for each step - the source code is available at https://github.com/enterprise-oss/saml-rails. The `main` branch adds Devise with a User model to a brand new Rails app using Postgres as the database. The application doesn’t do anything - there is an index route and a logged in route that will tell you the email for the current user. This guide assumes proficiency with Rails and so skips some details. We’ll also use some naive approaches for brevity and in order to demonstrate the challenge of SAML SSO. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ll use the same Rails 6 application for each step - the source code is available [here] (https://github.com/enterprise-oss/saml-rails). The `main` branch adds Devise with a User model to a brand new Rails app using Postgres as the database. The application doesn’t do anything - there is an index route and a logged in route that will tell you the email for the current user. This guide assumes proficiency with Rails and so skips some details. We’ll also use some native approaches for brevity and in order to demonstrate the challenge of SAML SSO. 
```

### Single tenant
#### With ruby-saml and mock IDP

> My first experience with SAML was working on [internal software at WeWork](https://medium.com/@tsharon/democratizing-ux-670b95fbc07f) where one of my Osso co-founders was a teammate. The IT department required us to use SAML SSO, which I at first was awfully annoyed by. Google OAuth was super easy, and could be restricted to domain, so what’s the deal with this OneLogin thing? Fortunately, single-tenant SAML was just as simple to implement, and admittedly did include some better security. But that’s generally the situation you’ll face - an enterprise company requires SAML, and it might seem silly to you, but them’s the rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My first experience with SAML was working on [internal software at WeWork](https://medium.com/@tsharon/democratizing-ux-670b95fbc07f) where one of my Osso co-founders was a teammate. The IT department required us to use SAML SSO, which I at first was awfully annoyed by. Google OAuth was super easy, and could be restricted to domain, so what’s the deal with this OneLogin thing? Fortunately, single-tenant SAML was just as simple to implement, and admittedly did include some better security. This is a common situation — an enterprise company requires SAML, and it might seem silly to you, but them’s the rules.
```

Each of the controller actions above calls a private method `saml_settings`. Since we are dealing with a single tenant, we will essentially hardcode the SAML configuration values to support this one IDP instance.

```ruby title="app/controllers/application_controller.rb"
  private

  def saml_settings
    settings = OneLogin::RubySaml::Settings.new
    
    # You provide to IDP
    settings.assertion_consumer_service_url = "http://#{request.host_with_port}/saml_callback"
    settings.sp_entity_id                   = "my-single-tenant"
    
    # IDP provides to you
    settings.idp_sso_target_url             = "https://idp.ossoapp.com/saml-login"
    settings.idp_cert                       = Rails.application.credentials.idp_cert
    
    settings
  end
```

**Values you provide**

**ACS URL** - The Assertion Consumer Service URL is where the IDP will send the user with a SAMLResponse when they log in. Similar to a Redirect URI in OAuth, your application will generate this value according to how your routes are set up.

> **SP Entity ID**  - Sometimes called the Audience URI, this is a unique identifier for the tenant in your application. This can get hairy! Google requires that they be unique for a customer, so you can't just use domain. Azure won't let you use a UUID. And Ping won't let you use a url. Those are just some of the edge cases we've found!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**SP Entity ID**  - Sometimes called the Audience URI, this is a unique identifier for the tenant in your application. This can get hairy! **Google** requires that they be unique for a customer, so you can't just use domain, while **Azure** won't let you use a UUID and **Ping** won't let you use a url. Those are just _some_ of the edge cases we've found!
```

      request = Rack::Request.new(rack_env)
      SAML_SETTINGS[identity_provider_id.chomp('/callback').to_sym].merge({
        assertion_consumer_service_url: acs_url(request.url)
      })
    end
  
    def acs_url(request_url)
      url = request_url.chomp('/callback')
      url + '/callback'
    end
  end
```

This block must return the same `saml_settings` we saw in the single-tenant approach for both the request and callback actions - `omniauth-saml` uses `ruby-saml` under the hood, so the keys are the same. We’ve replaced our private controller method with a class constant that includes the same attributes for the same tenant. We’re using a hash with a key of `example.com` - in order to use these SAML settings, we need to submit a POST request to `/users/auth/saml/example.com`. This sorta breaks Rails conventions, so we'll adjust it later.

We also add a convenience method here for the ACS url - since this block is used for both the request and callback, we need to be a little hacky to ensure this block always returns a hash with the proper callback path - a better approach, as we’ll see later, would be to derive all of these config values from a model instance.

> With that in place, we can slightly adjust our login flow and should still be able to log in using the first tenant. We’re harcoding the `identity_provider_id` as `example.com` to match the key above. We’re not quite yet supporting multi-tenancy, but most of the parts are in place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that in place, we can slightly adjust our login flow and should still be able to log in using the first tenant. We’re hardcoding the `identity_provider_id` as `example.com` to match the key above. We’re not quite supporting multi-tenancy yet, but most of the parts are in place.
```

```ruby title="application/views/index.html.erb" {13-14}
  <div class="container">
    <div class="main-content login">
      <h1>Welcome!</h1>
      <% flash.each do |name, msg| %>
        <% if msg.is_a?(String) %>
          <div class="alert alert-<%= name == :notice ? "success" : "error" %>">
            <%=raw content_tag :div, msg, id:"flash_#{name}" %>
          </div>
        <% end %>
      <% end %>
      <%= form_with(url: '/users/auth/osso', method: 'post', class: 'login-form') do |form| %>
        <%= form.label :email, "Email" %>
        <%= form.email_field :email %>
        <button type='submit'>Login with SAML SSO</button>
      <% end %>
    </div>
  </div> 
```

Now we can log in again using an `example.com` email address, and we'll skip over Osso's hosted login page. The downside of this approach is that Osso will display an error if there is not a SAML configured customer for the supplied domain. 

> To best serve our SAML SSO users, we'd only send users who belong to an onboarded SAML customer to Osso, and we wouldn't require a user to remember that they use SAML SSO to sign in. Frankly this issue has become _incredibly fraught_. Non-SAML users hate when you split a login form into two steps, and they usually have no idea why anyone would implement such a poor UX. But there's no perfect solution if we want to serve all of our users well, just the least bad solution, and we'll do our best to make our login flow frustrate the least number of users - engineering is, after all, about tradeoffs.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To best serve our SAML SSO users, we'd only send users who belong to an onboarded SAML customer to Osso, and we wouldn't require a user to remember that they use SAML SSO to sign in. Unfortunately this issue has become _incredibly fraught_. Non-SAML users _hate_ when you split a login form into two steps, and they usually have no idea why anyone would implement such a poor UX. There's no perfect solution if we want to serve all of our users well, just the least bad solution. We'll do our best to make our login flow frustrate the least number of users — engineering is, after all, about tradeoffs.  
```
